Larval lampreys (amrnocoetes) are suspension feeders that inhabit burrows in the soft sediment of streams. The larval phase may last from 3 to 13 yr. Their diet consists of a mixture of algae (primarily diatoms), organic detritus, and bacteria (Manion 1967; Moore and Beamish 1973). Although most investigators have focused their attention on the algal component (Creaser and Hann 6929; Schroll 1959; Manion 196'7), algae actually comprise little of the diet. Based on indirect calculations, Moore and Potter (1976b) estimated that algae accounted for only 0.14 to 1.5% by volume of the diet of larval European brook lamprey (Lcampetra planeri) in a eutrophic stream in England. They coracluded that because algae contributed so little to the diet, ingested detritus and bacteria are probably more important to the nutrition of these animals. Although organic detritus is frequently reported in the gut contents of all species of larval lampreys (Schroll 1959; Sterba 1962; Hardisty and Potter 1971), there are few estimates of its importance as a nutritional resource. A laborat~ry experiment by Moore and Potter (19'76a) found that E. pEarzen' ammocoetes increased in wet weight by 2.1 % when fed 20-30 rng-~-l detritus for 60 d at 15'C, but lost weight at this concentration over the same period at 5°C. Thus, the significance of organic detritus in amrnocoete diets remains unclear. The purpose of the present study was to directly quantify each dietary component (algae, bacteria, and detritus) and measure total diet assiigailation over a thirteen month period for two species of larval lampreys to identify their principal nutritional resource. Feeding rate, estimated from gut fullness, was also determined to further interpret the annual cycle of arnmocoete feeding.

Results

Diet Composition
Throughout the Great Lakes basin, for all sites and months sampled, organic detritus made up most sf the diet, averaging 97.79% of total diet AFDM. Algae contributed 2.12%, with diatoms alone comprising 1.79%. Bacteria were limited to 0.09% (data collected for Keweenaw sites only) of the total diet AFDM. Diets of sea lamprey and northern brook lamprey arnrnocoetes were made up of algae, bacteria, and detritus in proportions that were not significantly different (ANQVA; all p > 0.25). 

Algal and bacterial abundance in streams sampled at monthly intervals at the Keweenaw sites from May 1992 through May 1993 followed distinct seasonal patterns. As a percentage of diet AFDM, algal abundance peaked in May/June and September for all three sites (two-factor ANBVA; both p < 0.001; Fig. 2a). The cycle of bacterial abundance lagged about one month behind algal abundance, with peaks in July and October (two-factor ANBVA; both p > 0.25; Fig. 2b). Abundance of algae and bacteria in the diet declined in all three streams from November through March (Fig. 2). Winter samples (November-March) contained a significantly lower algal and bacterial biomass than samples collected during warmer periods (May-October) in all three streams (t-test; all p < 0.081). Algal and bacterial abundance in the diet, as a percentage of total AFDM, increased in May following the spring thaw as streams resumed more typical flows, temperatures warmed, and light levels increased (Fig. 2).

From May through October 1992, the amount of algal AFDM in the diet was higher, on average, in the West Branch of the Sturgeon River (6,46%), which has a canopy that remains relatively open, than in either the Misery (2.57%) or Pike (1.77%) rivers, which have closed canopies (ANOVA; p < 0.001). An unusually large spate in the Sturgeon River in July appears to have swept away much of the algae, resulting In a lower algal abundance in the diet for that month relative to all other summer months in that stream (ANOVA; p < 0.01; Fig. 2a). 

Ammocoetes sampled from the remainder of the Great Lakes basin showed similar diet composition to arnmscoetes sampled at Keweenaw sites (ANOVA; 0.15 < p < 63.20; Table 1). Riparian canopy was categorized as open or closed by field personnel of the Canadian Department of Fisheries and Oceans Sea Lamprey Control Centre. The amount of algal AFDM in the diet was typically higher for streams with open canopies (Fig. I; sites Id, 2, 3, 4, 5; Table 1). Algal - abundance in open canopy streams was, on average, 3.98% sf totd diet AFBM, whereas closed canopy streams had an algal abundance averaging only 1.27% (b-test; p < 0.02). Four deep-water sites were unshaded by riparian vegetation hut ammocoetes collected from these contained little algae. Two were lentic environments (Fig. 1; sites 6 and 7) and two were in large rivers (Fig. 1; sites 9 and 12). Both habitat types have low light penetration to bottom substrate which impedes the development of dgae. However, a suitable environment exists for ammocsetes (Wagner and Stauffer 1962).

Assimilation Efficiency 
In July 1992, we determined assimilation efficiencies for nine large individual northern brook lamprey ammocsetes (range 120-155 mm TL) from the Pike Rivdr. Mean %AE was 78.08% with a relatively low level sf variation (range 71.81-84.38%; CV = 5.92%). More typically, ammocoetes collected were too small (60-90 mm TL) to provide adequate gut samples to determine individual %AE. As there was little variation between ammocoetes collected at the same time within a stream, we pooled samples from five individuals for monthly measures of %AE. 
Throughout the year, lamprey ammocoetes assimilated, on average, 61% of organic detritus ingested. For the Keweenaw sites, %AE followed a seasonal cycle, peaking in July or August (Fig. 3a). Percent AE was higher during warmer months (May-October; mean = 72%) than during colder sampling periods (November-March; mean = 53%) (t-test; p < 0.05). Flooding in the West Branch of the Sturgeon River in July caused a change in diet composition resulting in no assimilation sf ingested material (Fig. 3a). Assimilation efficiency estimates from the remainder of Great Lakes basin sites (Table 1) fall within the range of values for ammocoetes sampled during late summer at the Keweenaw sites (Fig. 3a). 

Feeding Rate 
For the Keweenaw sites, gut fullness followed a seasonal cycle, peaking in June and decreasing through the remainder of the year (Fig. 3b). During wmer months (May-October), gut fullness was higher (0.13 mg diet AFDM*~-' ammocoete wet weight) than in colder sampling periods (November March; 0.07 mg diet AFI3M.g-' ammocoete wet weight) (b-test; p < 0.02; Fig. 3b). Ammscoetes sampled from the remainder sf Great Lakes basin sites typically had gut fullness values (Table 1) within the range found for ammocsetes sampled at the Keweenaw sites during late summer (Fig. 3b).
In the laboratory feeding experiment, mean feeding rates were 1.43 X 10-', 3.67 X lo-', and 3.21 X lo-* mg diet AFDM-~~' ammocoete wet weight-h-' at 2, 9, and 16OC, respectively. Gut fullness values at these temperatures were 0.08, 0.11, and 0.07 mg diet AFDM.~-' ammocoete wet weight. Although within-treatment variance was relatively high (CV = 58.51%), regression slopes of feeding rate and gut fullness between temperature treatments were significantly different (ANCOVA; both p < 0.001). 
From field gut fullness estimates and the experimentally determined slope of the regression relationship between gut fullness and feeding rate (b,; Fig. 4), we calculated feeding and assimilation rates for wild populations of lamprey ammocoetes from the Keweenaw sites for the period May 1992 through March 1993. Feeding rate (FW) was estimated as the product of gut fullness (GF), stream temperature (Temp), and the slope (b,) (Fig. 4). Assimilation rate (AR) was estimated as the product of feeding rate (FR) and field determined %AE. 

Discussion 
Seasonal Variation in the Abundance of Algae and Bacteria 
Variation in the abundance of algae in ammocwte diets follows the general annual cycle described for north temperate streams (Hynes 1970). Algae in diets peaked in late spring and early autumn when light availability and stream temperatures support high levels of diatom production (Chapman and Demory 1963; Hynes 1978). A similar cycle of algal abundance in ammocoete diets has also been reported in other studies (Moore 1972; Moore and Bemish 1973; Moore and Mallatt 1980). Bacterial abundance in the diet also followed a seasonal cycle, lagging about a month behind peaks in algal abundance. This may reflect the time required for bacterial population growth that is fueled by organic substrates from physiologically mature or senescent algae. Thus, variation in the abundance of algae and bacteria in ammocoete diets is consistent with the expected pattern of their availability in the annual stream cycle. 

Sources of Nutrients Supporting Lamprey Larvae 
Organic detritus is the principal trophic resource supporting the metabolism and growth of both sea lamprey and northern brook lamprey larvae in the populations studied. Microorganisms averaged only 2.2% of diet AFDM. Even if these are digested with 100% efficiency, their low concentration means they could account for no more than 4% of the organic matter assimilated. Because detritus makes up an average of 98% of diet AFDM and diet AFBM is assimilated with a mean efficiency of 61%, it is necessarily the case that most organic matter assimilated is detritus. The same conclusion was reported for two teleosts, Or~schrcsmis (Sarothsrodon) mossan~bicus (Bowen 198 1) and Prochikodus lineatus (pktensis) (Bowen et a%. 1984), that feed on similar mixtures of aggregated detritus and microorganisms. 

Although microorganisms provide a small fraction of the digesta, they may be important as sources of specific nutrients, especially vitamins, or as supplementary sources of digestive enzymes. Of much greater significance, they may play a critical role in production of the detritd fraction of the diet. There is a strong correlation between microorganism abundance and the digestibility of detritus, with assimilation efficiency lagging about one month behind microorganism abundance. Algal and bacterial abundances in ammocoete diets peaked in June and July, respectively, whereas peak %AE occurred in July and August. After October, %AE and microorganism abundance declined as stream temperatures cooled. Percent AE reached a low in January, increasing slightly in February before declining again in Mach (Fig. 3a). This February increase coincided with a period of warmer air temperatures from mid-January to early February 1993 that caused some stream ice melt, allowing light penetration to the stream bottom in some reaches for approximately two weeks. 

The correlation in the annual cycles of microorganism abundance and assimilation efficiency points to algae and bacteria as agents responsible for the production of more digestible detrital aggregate. At the Keweenaw sites, the four- to six-week-long period of high discharge following spring snow melt either buries or scours from the system much of the algae, bacteria, and organic detritus. This is followed in May and June by a spring diatom bloom during which cells begin to lay down layer upon layer of extracellular polymer matrix. Production of extracellular matrix is greater after the stationary growth phase as diatom cells become more physiologically mature (Decho 1990). This material entraps existing particles, adsorbs dissolved organic matter (DOM) and gradually builds up a "biofilm" layer (Decho 1998) comprised of "detrital aggregate" (Bowen 1979b). We speculate that the lag between peaks in diatom abundance and detritus digestibility (%AE) reflects the time required for detrital aggregate to accumulate, be dislodged by physical erosion, sloughing (Decha 19901, and invertebrate activity (Allanson 19731, and become a significant component of suspended particulate organic matter (POM) in streams. These newly produced particles are likely to be less degraded and refractory, and to have a higher food value than older particulate matter, especially that derived from vascular plant debris (Bowen 1979b). Not only do biofilms potentially represent a highly labile carbon source because they are more abundant in easily hydrolyzable polysaccharides, but the DOM adsorbed to their surface provides a reservoir of nutrients and organic compounds that are otherwise not available to particulate feeding organisms (Decho and Lopez 1993). Thus, we believe that the peak in %AE is likely due to increased availability of recently produced, more digestible detrital aggregate relative to other sources of detrital particles in streams. The correlation between bacterial abundance and the digestibility of detrital aggregate for lamprey larvae suggests that both heterotrophs derive their nutrition from labile detrital aggregate. 

This interpretation of the annual cycle is consistent with the effects of the July flood in the West Branch of the Sturgeon River. Flood waters appear to have swept away both algae and detritus, leaving only indigestible sediment in suspension for ammocoete feeding. This heavy bedload movement resulted in ammmocoete diets containing an extreme1 y high percentage of mineral matter compared with other months of the year. Typically, ammocoete diets contained, oq average, 35% mineral matter (range 14.80-6 1.25%; SE = 2.06). However, in July, ammocoete diets contained 75% mineral matter. After stream discharge returned to normal, algal abundance increased in August and diet digestibility peaked later in September. Thereafter, the pattern for the Sturgeon River was comparable to the other two streams.

Ammocoete Adaptations to Detritivory 
Compared with other detritivsrsus fishes, the digestive tract of lamprey ammocoetes is unspecialized (Hardisty and Potter 1971). It consists of little more than a simple tube about half as long as the animal's body, with some differentiation into esophagus and intestine. As no mucosal folds or lateral caeca are evident, the surface area for absorption appears to be small. Also, the pH in the intestine of ammocoetes is circumneutral, typically around 7.5 (Barrington 1972). Other detritivsrous fishes studied to date show morphological adaptations for digestion of detritus (Bowen 1980, 1984; Mundahl and Wissing 1988). Yet lamprey ammocoetes assimilate an average of 61% of the organic matter in their diets, a percentage similar to that reported for other detritivorous fishes (Bowen 1981; Bowen et d. 1984; Mundahl and Wissing 1988; Ahlgren 1990b). The question remains, how can lamprey ammocoetes so efficiently utilize a low quality food resource such as detritus while having no apparent morphological adaptations of their digestive tract? 

Ammoeoetes feed very slowly. We estimate from gut fullness data and the experimentally determined gut fullness/ feeding rate relationship that at between 9 and 15"C, ammocoetes feed at rates ranging from 4.2 to 5.5 mg diet AFDM.~-' ammocoete.d-'. This is far below the 60 mg diet AFDM.~-' fish-d-' typical of other juvenile fishes fed highly digestible diets ad jibiturn (Brett and Groves 1979, inter alia). Slow feeding is consistent with observations that amrnocoetes' respiratory pumping rate and metabolic rate are both slower than those observed for other fishes (Mallatt 1982; Sterba 1962; Hill and Potter 1970) and with the long time period required far gut clearance in ammocoetes (Moore and Mallatt 1980). In the absence of discernable morphological adaptations for digestion sf detritus, it appears that amrnocoetes achieve a high assimilation efficiency with an extraordinarily long period of digestion. This suggests that natural selection may have favored a low metabolic rate as an adjustment to the limited nutrient assimilation rate associated with this digestive strategy. In turn, low metabolism is linked to slow growth and the extended length of the detritivorous larval phase (3-13 yr; Applegate 1950; Lowe et al. 1973). Thus, many of the life history characteristics of lamprey larvae can be interpreted as adaptations to organic detritus as a food resource. 

The destructive impact of sea lamprey predation on Great Lakes fishes is currently partially controlled by chemical treatment of streams to kill larvae before most metamorphose into the parasitic form. Due to both cost and limited effectiveness, the level of control in many parts of the basin is not adequate to support management objectives. There is a growing need to supplement or replace the cur-rent control technology with less expensive, more effective, and more environmentally benign technologies. Identification of the link between the detritus food resource and larval Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci., bl. 51, 1994 lamprey production may prov opportunities for new control ide a step toward identifying strategies. 